Migrating from Open Source to Enterprise (#168)
questdb/documentation: documentation/operations/migrate-to-enterprise.md

---
title: Migrate to Enterprise edition
sidebar_label: Migrate to Enterprise edition
description:
  Instructions on how to upgrade a QuestDB open source installation to QuestDB
  Enterprise.
---

This page covers the steps to migrate a database instance from QuestDB open
source edition to QuestDB Enterprise edition.

## Overview

The QuestDB Enterprise edition is based on the Open Source edition of the
database.

Migrating from QuestDB Open Source to QuestDB Enterprise is a straightforward
process. It is nonetheless important to follow the steps carefully to ensure a
successful migration.

## Migration Workflow

### Step 1: Backup your data

> Before you start the migration process, follow the instructions in the

Author: Cool.. I'll rename this to `Step 0` and re-word.

[Backup and restore](/docs/operations/backup/) section to back up your QuestDB
installation. It is unlikely that you will need the restore point, but it is
a good idea to have it in case something goes wrong.

In short:

* Checkpoint the database:
  ```questdb-sql
  CHECKPOINT CREATE
  ```

* Back up the files, such as creating a `.tar` archive or taking an AWS EBS
  volume snapshot.

> ### Step 2: Identify the QuestDB Open Source base version

Author: Are we really comfortable having them jump both between OSS and Ent in one go?

I've split this up since if they do the OSS migration first and they hit issues it allows us to isolate problems faster and support them faster.

Is my suggested approach too conservative?

> ### Step 2: Identify the QuestDB Open Source base version

Reviewer: I'd say yes, it's quite conservative, unless you have a scenario or past prod issue to illustrate.

Mapping between Enterprise and OSS releases is quite obscure at the moment. This step will generate a lot of support questions, I'd expect, and in the end, we will still advise to update to the latest Enterprise version. The only exception I see in this situation is when the customer has discovered a bug in the recent OSS release and they don't want to get this bug in the latest OSS, and the steps you suggest do not solve this situation.

> ### Step 2: Identify the QuestDB Open Source base version

Author: Alright. I'll reword and remove the step.

Each release of QuestDB Enterprise is based on a specific version of the open
source edition.

Consult the [release notes](https://questdb.com/release-notes/?type=enterprise)
of the Enterprise version you are migrating to, and identify the base Open
Source version.

For example, _QuestDB Enterprise 2.2.4_ is based on _QuestDB Open Source 8.2.3_.

### Step 3: Update your Open Source installation

> Now update your Open Source installation to the base Open Source version

Author: Marking as resolved, purely to have a single conversation thread about this in https://github.com/questdb/documentation/pull/168#discussion_r2054438128

:::tip
You may consult the [release notes](https://questdb.com/release-notes/?type=enterprise)
to consult the latest changes and features.
:::

### Step 2: Install and restart the database

> * Unpack the binaries in a directory of your choice.
> * Stop the database.
> * Start the database with the new binaries _in place_.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Unpack the binaries in a directory of your choice.
* Replace your existing QuestDB binaries with the new ones.
* Stop the database.
* Start the database with the new binaries _in place_.
```

:::

### Step 4: Set up user accounts and permissions

TODO TODO TODO TODO TODO TODO TODO TODO TODO TODO TODO TODO TODO TODO TODO
TODO TODO TODO TODO TODO TODO TODO TODO TODO TODO TODO TODO TODO TODO TODO
TODO TODO TODO TODO TODO TODO TODO TODO TODO TODO TODO TODO TODO TODO TODO
TODO TODO TODO TODO TODO TODO TODO TODO TODO TODO TODO TODO TODO TODO TODO

### Step 5: Setting up replication

If you wish to use the replication features, continue with setting up the
object store and `server.conf` changes as detailed in the
[Database Replication](/docs/operations/replication/) guide.

## Unsupported Migration Workflows

When a database is migrated from the Open Source to the Enterprise edition, the
database upgrades the state in each of the database tables to enable the new
features of the Enterprise edition, such as database replication.

Because of this, we only support an in-place edition migration.

:::warning

We do not support directly copying table data directories and files from an Open
Source installation to an Enterprise installation, as the required state for
Enterprise features would not be initialized and the database would not operate
correctly.

> If you have a production instance of QuestDB Open Source and have already been 
> testing the new features of the Enterprise edition, delete all files and
> settings from this test instance first. If you had activated the replication
> features, this includes clearing out the object store.

Reviewer 2: This is a bit unclear to me. Will the test box become the new Enterprise box? If so, maybe we can say something along the lines of

```suggestion
If you have a production instance of QuestDB Open Source and have already been 
testing the new features of the Enterprise edition on a second instance, ensure that you are starting
with an empty database directory. If you had activated the replication
features, this includes clearing out the object store.
```

### Step 4: Set up user accounts and permissions

First override the default admin credentials in `server.conf`.
It is recommended to select a non-trivial username and password.
```
acl.admin.user=myadmin
acl.admin.password=mypwd
```
The above settings will replace the default built-in admin account
(`admin`/`quest`) to make the database safer.

However, the password is still stored in the configuration file as

> plain text.

Author: Why not just skip this step and have them create the new admin account and disable `admin`?

used for database and user management.

For example, the simplest way to create a full admin:
```questdb-sql
CREATE USER administrator WITH PASSWORD adminpwd;
GRANT ALL TO administrator WITH GRANT OPTION;
```

The above `administrator` user replaces the built-in admin, which can be
disabled now in the configuration file:
```
acl.admin.user.enabled=false
```

The built-in admin settings can stay in `server.conf`, and can be
re-enabled in emergency situations, such as all database administrators
have forgotten their passwords.

Now we can go ahead and setup groups, user and service accounts with the
help of the new database administrator(s).
More details on this topic can be found in the
[RBAC documentation](/docs/operations/rbac/#user-management).

For setting up Single Sign-On (SSO), please, refer to the
[OIDC Integration](/docs/operations/openid-connect-oidc-integration) guide,
which explains how QuestDB integrates with OAuth2/OIDC providers in general.
Although we cannot cover all OAuth2 providers, we also documented
[PingFederate](/docs/guides/active-directory-pingfederate)
and [Microsoft EntraID](/docs/guides/microsoft-entraid-oidc)

> example setups. Other providers should be configured similarly.

Author: I'd add a 

```
:::warning
It's important to disable the built-in admin user for security purposes.
:::
```

Reviewer 3: added the warning
